In this section we're going to be building out a rock paper scissors game and this is predominantly
going to use conditions and it's going to really allow you to put into practice what we've learned in
the previous lessons.
So first of all let's set up our application.
We're going to.
First off we're going to ask a question and this is going to be from the player.
We're going to use prompt and we're going to ask them do you choose.
So rock
paper or scissors.
So that's going to be the first question that we're going to ask the player.
So coming in when it loads and let me reload the page.
So there we go.
So we've got our question and as we saw earlier those values are going to be stored within player.
So the next thing that I wanted to do is I wanted to set up another variable and this is going to be
whether the player is going to win.
So it's just basically a boolean value that we can use as a placeholder that we can't access.
We apply our conditions and for those of you that are unfamiliar with the game rock paper scissors.
So basically there's three options and one option always trumps the other option so if you click rock
then and the other player picks paper then the paper essentially covers the rock and that player wins.
Rock beats scissors scissors beat Paper Paper beats rock.
In that order.
So there's always one choice that will beat another one.
Or you could end up with a tie and that's why this is ideal.
This is an ideal game for conditions because we've got a lot of conditions that we need to check and
see if they're met.
So let's set up our computers so this is our computer player and he's going to have a selection as well.
So we know that there's three options.
So we need to get a random value and we need to divide it by three.
So let's do the math.
And random.
And we saw earlier that we could multiply it by three and we can get the 1 to 3.
So that's one way of doing it.
But let's just leave math random and this time we're going to do this all with conditions and we know
that math random by default provides a number from 0 0 0 dollars and a whole bunch of decimal placed
numbers.
So and the way that we were using it before as we were multiplying in order to get a value.
So this time what we're going to do is we're going to check to see if the value that the computer selected
is less than zero point three four.
So we know that that number is going to be a third.
So one in three chance of having the number less than zero point three four.
And if it is then we're just going to reuse that value for the computer and we're going to set it to
one of three.
So let's start with rock.
So basically if it's less than zero point three for the computer is going to have a rock.
And now we need to add in the additional conditions to see if the computer has less than zero point
six seven and then Otherwise it's going to be the third option.
So I don't want to do now pause the video and add in the rest of the two choices within this conditional
statement.
So basically what we want is we want a 1 in 3 chance of it being either rock paper or scissors and go
ahead and plus video and add that into the code and I'll show you the solution coming up.
So if you had an opportunity to try that out and as we saw earlier we've got conditional statements
so we can ask another question.
We can say if a computer is.
So if this one is true then the computer is going to be equal to rock and computer is going to be overwritten.
And this is going to be no longer available to be true.
So the next option is let's go 6 7 and if it's falling within six seven then we're going to set the
value of computer to paper.
And then finally if none of those are true we know that we can set the value of computer to the last
value.
So basically we have a 1 in 3 chance of selecting one of these each one of these values.
So let's make sure that this is working out.
We'll put it into the console's computer and save that refresh and we see that we need to make our choice.
So let's do rock.
And we see that computer gets rock as well.
So it doesn't matter how many times I'm actually going to disable this for now and I'll just say you're
just going to refresh it a bunch of times and we can see that we're getting all three different entries.
So all I'm doing is just refreshing.
And if you look down here in the console we're making one of the selections so it's either rock paper
scissors.
And there's roughly a 1 in 3 chance for each one of those.
So that really is the basic functionality of the game.
And now we're ready to go to check to see who the winner is.
So we've got our players selection.
We've got our computers selection.
And now last but not least we need to make sure we do a final check to see if the player wins or if
the computer wins.
So want to introduce you to a string method and this is going to be useful when we're building out this
application and what this is going to do is this is going to allow us to select that first character.
So if we do character at and we specify which position we want to return the character from whatever
is selected computer remember it's scissors.
So let's say we want that s we can see that we can return back the first character within any string
by using character.
And then specifying whatever character we want to return box if you want the second one or the third
one then we would just need to indicate that we are going to look at more at string methods later on
in this course as well.
I just want to introduce this because I want to also pull out that first character from the user's response
so allowing them to either do R.P. or S to be shorter so they don't always have to type in the full
value.
And there's another reason too that I want to grab that first character and do a comparison of the first
characters.
And that's because I also want to transform this to uppercase.
So if for instance our character is not uppercase we can transform it to uppercase by using a built
in string method called to upper case.
And basically what this will do is this will transform any character to uppercase and we can also do
lowercase and of course we are going to look at this in more depth later on within the course.
But basically this allows us to transform
to upper case or lower case.
And this is also really important because when we're applying our condition we don't want to have to
account for if the player's done lower case if they've done upper case so we don't want it to be case
sensitive we just want to be able to match that if it's our rock.
And if the computer has rock then we know that it's a tie and so on.
So let's set up some more values here.
And I'm going to take that player value and transform it to upper case.
So this is the player's selection so just do P S for short.
And we're going to take player and we're going to use with what we just saw so character at and position
zero.
And we're going to also transform it to uppercase and we're going to use p s and we're going to compare
it to the computer selection.
So let's set up computer selection.
So variable computer selection and this one is going to use computer character at position 0 and it's
also going to transform it to uppercase so it doesn't actually matter whether it's the players entered
in lower case or upper case.
It's going to transform them.
So this is where we need to start looking at how we can tell if the player won or if the computer won.
And this is where we're going to use our conditional statements and take what we've learned earlier.
It's a great exercise in applying this logic.
So what I want you to do now is to try it out and I'm going to show you the solution coming up in the
next lesson.
So the first one that we need to look at is we need to check if it's a tie.
So compare P Es to C S and see if they're equal and if they are equal that we know that it's a tie and
owls.
So if they're not equal then we know that 1 player 1 and 1 player lost and we need to be able to determine
that.
And we can do that with conditions.
So the first line would be comparing C-s to us.
And then the next one.
B b checking if S is a rock.
And if it is then we check to see if C-s did scissors.
And then we know that the player wins.
So we're going to be doing all of the conditions and checking to see if the player wins and if the player
does win then we're going to transform win.
True and that's how we get to know that if the player won or lost at the end of all of those conditions.
So that's coming up in the next lesson.
And one more thing before we finish up this lesson so I just spotted an error.
So both of these are actually methods.
So we've got to make sure that we use the rounded brackets at the end of those upper case.
So make sure that we save it.
Try it out and we know that right now we can't enter that in.
So I'm going to see p s.
So we're getting it as R C S as s.
So now you can go ahead and make those comparisons of p s and see s to see if they match in upcoming
lesson.
I'm going to show you the solution
and we're going to work out all of the logic to determine who won and who lost in this game of rock
paper scissors.